before we get on with today's incredibly
special episode and I mean that by the
way let me tell you about my favorite
brand-new collection RPG raid shadow
legends Jordan you're cleared you sure
can
but only if you act fast by downloading
the game using my special link in the
description and searching my clan tag to
join the party there's only a limited
number of people I can take so hurry on
over the game's been growing super fast
and the highly anticipated new update is
now live and that includes a new loyalty
program for new players that gives you a
daily login reward for the first 90 days
so if you've been late to join now's
your chance to catch up the games got
amazing graphics strategic gameplay huge
boss fights an amazing storyline and
over Florida champions be to collect and
personally customize so if that's your
thing this is your place one of my
favorite champions is Ignatius because
frankly just look at him he's isn't he
adorable he's gonna bash their head in
with that fire hammer and he's not even
gonna give a second thought about it so
stop waiting and go to the video
description click on my special link and
you'll instantly get 50,000 silver and a
free epic champion as part of the new
player program to start your journey
good luck out there soldiers
[Music]
hi there I'm John and this is the
jontron head-to-head Game Jam today to
my T teams will face off against one
another in a desperate race against time
to create a fully functional video game
with which they will try to impress an
expert panel of judges
they will undertake this Herculean task
from separate chambers each one fully
outfitted with an identical set of all
the necessary tools and hardware
required to build their masterpiece the
footage you're about to see is not
pre-planned or doctored in any way it
follows in real time each team's journey
to outdo the other in the art of
interactive entertainment so without
further ado let's meet our teams in the
right corner we have the mighty team
gumdrop featuring Chris O'Neil animator
musician and the one and only Oni Angie
Michael Swain programmer professional
flash game developer and avid sauce
historian Matt jolly animator game
developer and creator of the Madness
series on Newgrounds and opposing them
today the unparalleled
team unsane consequences featuring
jontron man who has never made a game
Tom Jackson unity expert with over 15
years industry experience and Claudia
Kovacs 3d and Hugh I artist clocking in
over seven years experience between her
and Tom they've completed over 30 game
jams today's all right now that you're
all acquainted with each other why don't
you shake hands it's gonna be good man
it's gonna be cool I got a bet you're
wondering by the way why I'm here twice
good luck it's because it's a little
thing called when the guy was gonna play
the host three hours before you shoot
this whole thing you've been planning
for 10 months just doesn't show up so it
was either me who was supposed to be
standing there for real this is not a
joke by the way I wasn't supposed to be
the host so just pretend I'm standing
right there and we're gonna be all good
all right everyone how the hell are you
doing the next 72 hours your lives are
gonna be very interesting indeed but
only three of you can leave here as the
game champion so if you manage to
complete your mission and impress the
judges you will be the proud owner of
this prize that's right this trophy
comprised entirely of vague monetary
you I moved to tears alright now that
you all know the stakes it's time to get
your prompts which will dictate the kind
of game you're making well let's go to
it alright here we are at the prompt o
matic rules are pretty simple
there's 15 prompts whatever prompt you
get you've got to make a game based on
it each team gets two vetoes and then we
pick so if you don't like to you veto
them if we don't like to we veto them so
that basically you can get rid of one
you really don't want to do
alright so team gumdrop what's your
first veto what I really hate that one
the archaeologist yeah good luck ok game
about the depressed archaeologists gone
in my opinion I really ain't gonna say
the same with me well which one are you
thinking the postman in hot house game
with user-generated content I mean you
have to make something with UGC and the
game jam is insane first yeah there's
more than that house friendship it's
really fluffy isn't it ok ok we're gonna
take this one out of the running so
what's your second feels again I think
we really despise the idea of making a
cooking game where's that okay goodbye a
cross between cookie clicker and sunny
Hawk's Pro Skater but funnier gone so I
guess the last one I feel like that
crowdfund one is ever want to hate the
most
yeah probably out of all of them that's
the weirdest and hardest one to do okay
yeah crowd plan student project poops on
drugs beer goodbye so we have 11 prompts
left and now this is the catch each team
picks for the other team but there's
only one way to find out who goes first
and you know what that is done you a
guinea pig race alright here we are
rules are pretty simple each team's got
a nice cute little guinea pig with a
cape to match we're gonna let them ride
and who's ever teams get to the center
first wins
and they get to pick first okay so
Claudia will be doing the honors and
who's doing the honors on your team
Chris you're captain take a booth okay
okay here we go
Chris and Claudia you ready yeah three
two one
Oh
[Music]
this is Ling Ling go
Ling Ling come on oh oh there we go come
on you fooi what are you doing throwing
that's the point of the maze
unfortunately moto go distract it don't
distract it delimited
[Music]
you clever little thing oh my god a
surprised and upset Ling Ling is the
winner and Kiwis useless there we go
alright everyone's a winner today except
a state they won you get to put yours
down now though all right team gumdrop
you won that event of the century so you
get to pick first so what game will we
be making we think you should do a game
where you wield a bazooka which is
attached to an assault rifle and
misfires often okay that's ours
game where you wield a bazooka which is
attached to an assault rifle and this
fire is often I think that's got some
good times up on us okay and you guys
will be making we decided this one a
game where you control a clumsy pirate
who hates the monarchy so there you go
right from Britain yeah yeah we're
coming for you next
all right enough chat let the game jam
commence
[Music]
okay it's real okay it's real this time
hmm okay off to a great start
okay uh we need to make a game where you
control a clumsy pirate who hates the
monarchy all right where should I stick
this game where you wheel the bazooka
which is attached to an assault rifle
and misfires often so what I like about
this and you tell me because you got the
experience yeah yeah obviously it gives
us the the mechanism here yeah with the
yeah the mechanic is kind of already
there like a gun attached to a gun a
bazooka is not really a gun I suppose we
shoot the gun we add the misfiring in
and make it fun yeah well that you cuz
otherwise your characters just annoying
and every now and then like Jess you out
of place without a wolf it's fun maybe
if we did something like software piracy
that could be I don't know how we make
that fun just run it all the way out
like you can download a car what else do
we have for pirates are we kind of
running out of options
the Somali kind of the self-work right
anybody who takes wantedly as a pirate
water is kind of implied whatever we do
we can work with water right but I don't
know the water is one of our strengths
so if we're gonna go for water even
using out of box unity stuff I don't
know that we're going to have the best
possible product as a result of that do
not think maybe would be a good idea to
like start with a mechanic or a simple
concept maybe I I kind of feel like
we're all sort of artistically inclined
even me the programmer like I feel like
we we have like a mood or something that
can inspire the gameplay mechanic and I
could be wrong I'm totally down to talk
mechanics first what are you really
doing this kind of situation yeah
probably just make it just make it you
start yeah and you just you make the
mechanic thing and you make that ten
second ten seconds of fun you just try
and get that down and then you build
this sort of scenario around it what if
the misfiring is like based on your
actual skill like if you do something
wrong in this phase so if you do
something wrong it misfire yeah I like
what it's like really delicate so you
have to be very careful with this gun
and if you said war too fast or you bump
into something it'll go off hmm oh that
could be the whole thing yeah once it
starts going off right then it's like
this chain reaction of like chaos if you
want to fire the bazooka you actually
have to mess up yeah so now you know you
might have to kill the boss or whatever
and like the only ways to use a bazookas
you have to literally run into the walls
and stuff to make it yeah and then I
could we let you do some people as well
that you don't want yeah yeah right oh
wait what I was thinking for the
software pirate if we want to do
something like that
okay it's a bet it's been a clumsy
pirate so it has to be him knocking [__]
over yeah that's true we can't forget
like the operating word here is clumsy
pirate was this thing that was like
clumsy like torrenting dude just like he
gets more frustrated with the monarch
the more he gets caught by the
government for torrenting [__] yeah so
he sends viruses to them can you show me
what the gameplay might look like like
physically because all I say is like one
of those games like the war well games
where you just see your own desktop is
the game look would you obviously not be
what we would do because that would be
what you see here's what you see it's in
this computer so it's like a
side-scrolling no no no this is the
first scene this is like yeah
no fedora oh yeah this is right it's got
his cape now and redneck beard like that
optin redneck beard holy [__] we do
that's the name no I'm like really sold
on this idea just because I can actually
while you guys are programming one
hasn't been corrupted by capitalism I'm
liking this idea only just because we're
using the gimmick is that it's just a
doofus idiot guy it covers the clumsy
stronger than it covers the pirate yeah
in the monarchy yeah that's more dialed
in than like this one if something is
gonna be anyway I was gonna say if we're
gonna make anything strong like yeah I
like this clumsy idea I couldn't I can
get to work on a guy that does some of
this stuff that you click and drag him
around at the very least to be setting
up the collision boxes to more or less
ragdoll character stand up yeah I could
absolutely just jump all over that I
like it start like sending you blend
files or whatever okay I'll start on him
and yeah let's get to it
all right so we'll break the stations
yes yeah I'll have to make the plan to
make the FMV these like tomorrow that's
fine yeah kiss me yes we have to see how
long it takes to make it feel good yeah
and control the guns well you tell me do
we have them to start of course man yeah
all right all right
and then comes any more ideas just okay
speak sure
oh my god sitting down to make the game
now this is real just like straight-up
real
I'm gonna make it fedor man got damn
right you do
they swear that I'm gonna judge
everything okay so me and Matt need to
make a [__] ton of bedroom assets yeah
and start only with the core furniture
stuff we'll worry about all the cool
like flower pots and toaster oven yeah
yeah yeah I'll mark the stuff that I'm
working on or like am getting done yeah
so we can have this stuff divided up
pretty evenly I'm gonna start sculpting
or sweet young man okay oh cool as
viewers at home this is the fun part
this is proof this is what nothing looks
good yet so we ended last night at we
only really spent a couple hours last
night we just did the storm session you
know we got our Google drive's
sync so we can share assets why are you
laughing it's serious you need
organization this kind of procedure
anyways this is where the real division
of labor is gonna begin I'm gonna be a
player with no slinky
it's tough I mean this is a game in
itself Claudia's working on you know
getting some models right yeah oh yeah
she's making the train model and this is
the UV layout for the model this is why
I need to begin texturing yeah Tom's
working on our little bazooka man or our
makeshift bazooka man I don't think he's
gonna look like this I'm actually I'm
liking it it's funny what kind of pants
would have [__] neckbeard wear sweat
pants janko's janko's even better Legos
really oh yeah you're too young it's the
really good 30 way too young this is
like a early 90s phenomenon so swain is
working hard on the game engine right
now so right now we have this little uh
this player right here those little
things in the front are just to help me
understand which way is facing once I
have a better system you'll be able to
grab his hands and kind of pull them and
grab on to them so let's grab this thing
here like that and I'm holding this as
long as I hold spacebar I continue to be
able to swing this around keep in mind
this model is gonna be swapped with the
guy that Chris made and Matt is
currently finishing up we're just gonna
try to make a fun little and close
experiment and see if that if that
experiment yields a fun scenario we
don't know we're gonna try they have we
need shooting and you start running it's
just yeah so that's cool yeah you know
it's how wacky who works as well because
he's like this thing is dude was too
heavy and it actually feels super heavy
and made it looks like he's shaking it
walking yeah I know is the best I could
do to get this sort of clumsy times the
effects oh yeah we got to let them get
to this so we're gonna give you an
update in a little bit but I am going to
be I think working on the little so
basically starts with AB it starts with
the cutscene start screen
emission briefing some codecs and then
an end I've seen how they get that
scream yeah and then the death screen
ones will be random and our little
general character is gonna be Dutch cuz
American general is just so cliche oh my
god
Wow your brain looks a lot different
than I expected
I'm gonna have to brush up on my okay so
now we need to collect the sound work
and Foley for this slob main character
of ours so we're gonna kind of like
putts around the space here already okay
I'm gonna do the eating one now alright
alright this view is disgusting I can
see the little crumbs and every single
every single pores right left right
we got a perfectly good fly right here
he's alive
yeah you want to put them in the game
record Mika how we fly effects do don't
we
okay right okay here is where I'm going
to be playing my dutch general right and
here's the costume we're gonna be using
and mel here is gonna turn me into a
Dutchman aren't you
we're gonna try at least yeah she's got
a nose she said she brought nose are
they're very Dutch Klaus very definite
first quality of the the quintessential
Dutchman's quality gonna need a big old
witch's nose that's literally I swear I
didn't I didn't ask her to do that she
did that all on her own
all I've come to witness the spectacle
this all points and laughs he's been
practicing since raises that's that's
actually what you do to real people to
people he for defeat keeper to people to
people
[Music]
[Laughter]
this does not look like a military
person but it could look like a human
person I'm really shocked at what I'm
looking at yeah it's weird kind of work
so you do look that's no meeting spike
dating screen okay this is important I
have to draw this every time I open up
Photoshop or I can't get any work done
it's Swain this is for the game this is
really important right now working on
some music I don't have any of my
contact libraries with me so I have to
make do with whatever FL Studio
downloaded with so I'm just starting off
with something intense and like
[Music]
like that swaying sometimes I do do that
hacking music yeah it is yesterday
why the name unsafe consequences
basically there's that video of what is
it Jesse slaughter her dad is like
really mad I don't know what happened to
her but he was like if you ever come
after my daughter again consequences
will never be the same
that's not such a funny thing it's
really dumb but that's why consequences
will never be the same
unhhhh same consequences don't ever
speak of this again by the way Tom works
on a moderate like this we had to create
that wallpaper just for its there's
normal job is it normal is it normal Tom
at a big thing is it normal this is
that's coder screen right there yeah for
this guy just randomly throws the face
oh yeah throws it the week I've ever
seen in my life now this is cool though
that's coming together this started off
kind of like you know whoever wins wins
but now we want to beat them because we
hear there's something going on down
there
some allegedly okay that's not gonna
happen not on our watch
[Music]
so it's gonna be like happening when you
playing running all over when it gets
stressful so there's there's a lot of
unknowns and nuances when it comes to
working in a 3d engine like unity and
they do a lot of work for you so that I
don't have to do much to make it feel
like he's this like bouncy goofy noodle
man
the problem is though that because of
the nuances of what they do for you and
that and I don't have complete control
over what goes into it I could be left
with a character whose physics pieces
don't collide correctly or collide too
often things that twist and move and
don't interact with the environment the
correct way and I could lose the day
working on something that the game can't
live without which is the controls and
the the characters general movement
system but this is the last like real
full day that we have tomorrow
is gonna be kind of a boss yeah but even
like spare time we can't think that we
have spare time like everything has to
like be towards getting it done and then
like we can't think we'll be done in a
few hours and then we get to actually
spend time beautifying cuz like you know
I keep saying that but that's really not
the case it's coming together it's
coming together yeah the FMV czar in
there it's got like that red alert to
evolve I think great it's pretty cool I
don't know we're sort of racing to meet
the clock now yeah we've got audio to do
get all the sound effects that you found
into the game I'm pretty I'm feeling
pretty tired about you guys yeah I'm
that good all right he's not have been
sleeping but it's just relentless work
now I agree yeah is it bad that I'm used
to this
[Music]
we going we good
this is the last day we are we are not
doing so good
Swain is stressed out I got a lot of
stuff left to record sound wise but even
if I do it there's a good chance it
won't get put in the game
weird [__] he's dealing with weird [__]
- what's going on Swain I'm trying to
finish the game yeah we got like we got
three hours left as of three minutes ago
so it's not it might not happen we'll
see we'll see what the hell happened to
the plan oh he's back - Henry is broken
there's basically every time you reached
out the game there's a 10% chance he is
just gonna die straightaway so you
speaking up we're [__] over if I don't
listen we'll be okay it sucks that we
couldn't get everything we wanted in yes
another good day you know neither does
anybody that's the thing what's
happening that I can recreate the the
thing and I'm not sure what's doing it
mmm watch this if I just go anywhere I
go like this yeah I know right
and that's the thing if this if it's
[__] what can we do about it that's it
that's the game that's it didn't we have
a build a few hours ago that was at
least functioning yeah if you want to go
back to that build and remove like eight
hours of work that we did today yeah
sure it's getting there I think we can
do it I think we're sort of I guess
pretty free no it's just
buggy yeah if we're gonna hand it in now
it would it would be okay but we want to
like fix a bunch of these little bugs
that seem to keep happening oh [__] okay
we're in the final 60 seconds oh that's
what it is
they're doing a thing the hour it's real
cute it's definitely about the hands
getting caught on [__] and I don't know
what the [__] the problem is I remember
the start you coded it maybe you got
some loose code does it work that way I
don't loose code yeah like yeah like
aberrant renegade code yes at the
beginning you coded it so that his head
would be kept up by some code would that
be part of the engine or I don't [__]
know that code works out
[Music]
it also got psychic yeah cheated and
still just fell down the gap she cheated
oh wait I cheated and then still lost
that's that's um that might be related
not gonna comment please [__] work
come on Oh No yep we got like 45 minutes
left and now our main characters
glitching through walls and [__] yeah
it's it's [__] great because
everything was fine and then now it's
God all right you see that what well
have this capsule with nothing wrong
with it just sent like just sent me
somewhere oh yeah see that all right I'm
gonna find all the things that seem to
cause it and we'll just like remove them
or something like what was that I'm no
idea what that was you see that you guys
it's working it's physics space and fun
I think game for a key all right I think
I got it maybe well what what was the
solution um there was like a [__]
input loop or a feedback loop on one of
the like y-values for the character
that's it
yeah it's something I was I had put in
to fix a problem with unity and now
something else is gonna break but that's
fine this problem is less important than
the one that we just solved okay so we
have 15 minutes that's fine I need to
take this 15 minutes to make sure that
all of the things that the character
does that all the like at things that
activate activate the way they're
supposed to that's all that's all I got
to do at least then we have a game right
okay it does your cup mm-hmm all right
go for it all right
this is the belch um yeah I think we're
done I just want to check the ending
just make sure these things play yeah oh
wait tonight is he not rotating hold on
a second no no no if it's not it's
because I changed it and I can put it
back on when we were doing our test one
minute you're doing great okay yeah
there it is that's all that's why Matt
was having so much trouble okay cool
well we found that in the last minute
Jesus all right we're zipping is it with
25 seconds on the clock
what do you fire that's pretty good yeah
we're about to have a game [__]
Christ I feel like a pregnant mother 5
seconds
okay done all right done whoo five or
and got it perfect done all right all
right we're done all right it's over
okay so we have the game we're not
working on it anymore but I'm just gonna
take a look at it now after a long 72
hours the game jam reaches its
conclusion
both teams return to the stage to
present their games to the expert panel
of judges please welcome stay-at-home
Wisconsin mom my son played the grand
theft auto one time next thing you know
he's strangled in Kemps before he moved
on to people hailing all the way from
Southeast Asia please welcome president
of the Lao People's Democratic Republic
bond hang for a chip and less but not
least world's strongest gamer hello oh
wow yeah I do speak a little bit of
Spanish oh that's real by the way I also
want to say if you dispute my name
because you're probably wondering are
you the strongest so at comic-con
2014 this creep this this effin weirdo
is like talking to some cosplay chip
that I was talking to I stalked him he
went down in about four seconds he bled
everywhere and yeah so I am strong as
hell but I could go on but yeah I do
love all games what's up first up will
be team unsane consequences they're
prompt a game where you wield a bazooka
which is attached to an assault rifle
and misfires often you can't you can't
hit the bazooka on things it has a
chance of firing and that see and if if
it fires it can knock you off the train
which is when you lose you can't
actually die yeah
in the cheap way of restarting which is
just amazing game again don't worry
about your shortcuts that's the one I
just looked up Dutch interjections
[Music]
those charges
too much to resist
that's alright it's time for team
gumdrop they're prompt a game where you
control a clumsy pirate who hates the
monarchy so he's captain neckbeard he
runs a pirate station and is trying to
steal Krypto from the monarchy
he's Bugsy I'll give you that yeah you
click you flick the hands to drag them
around use the mouse hoo to go in and
out yeah you gonna try and play for the
first time the camera spin yeah yeah I
don't know what give me that so yeah
he's like typing that's impacting on the
keyboard yeah you use money to buy tapes
and stuff from the fridge and the beats
that cost money to get you a taxi Biggs
is adding to the overall paranoia oh
it's about to kill you but adorable
yeah your poor fencer low
oh it did at least it did the sound of
three time that's right out of the mic
yeah my phone recorded everything on my
phone
[Applause]
both teams have played their games for
the panel and now the judges must come
to a final decision who will take home
the trophy
hello Twitter world it's yours truly
myself and the other two beautiful
little things to the right of me we all
made a choice we all sat down we all
chant he was actually very close was
within a hair green game Green Teams
team on the same consequences they had a
better built engine they had more
creativity when it comes to a mix of
live action and the game but we thought
team gumdrop had a more interesting
world that we wanted to see explored and
we could go into it more but in fact we
all got to do that right now - you go
add on what I just said unlike anything
with guns so I like the guns like the
Train we're about to rob a train I like
that so you know definitely the first
one played a lot better but I have to
say the second one I was really
impressed with how there was so much to
do much more to do I wanted to see more
of it but the first one definitely had
the better built and for that and for
all those reasons it bore we're gonna
say it on three we're gonna say - what 3
2 1 and we're gonna say so you ready 3 2
1 team
[Applause]
[Music]
christopher captain oh my god really
that was just a gag we have a real one
[Applause]
look at the gumdrops